# Unit 8 - Science and Scientists

> Science is common sense at its best. A scientist is someone who has felt arising within him a love for the mysteries of nature and the urge to lift a veil from its fascinating secrets. Text A is a combination of two editorials written by Bruce Alberts, editor-in-Chief of Science, giving advice to young professionals who wish to become scientists in the future. Text B explains what makes a scientific paper and the popular format. Without publication, science is dead. The format of scholarly writing is simply an agree-upon way of doing things — much like etiquette, or table manners.

## Text A - On Becoming a Scientist

> By Bruce Alberts

One normally becomes a scientist through a series of apprenticeships, pursuing research in laboratories directed by established scientists. My own scientific mentors were Jacques Fresco and Paul Doty at Harvard, where I learned not only technical skills but also how to think and function as a scientist. Both from them, and by making my own mistakes, I learned how to identify important problems, how to think critically, and how to design effective research strategies. Because so much of one’s scientific future is shaped by early experiences, it is critical that beginning scientists select their mentors wisely. Unfortunately, what constitutes a “good” choice is not always obvious. Here I offer some personal advice to help young scientists make these tough decisions wisely.

The exact project pursued for a PhD degree is not nearly as important as finding the best place for learning how to push forward the frontiers of knowledge as an independent investigator. My first piece of advice for graduate students is to begin research training in a laboratory led by a person with high scientific and ethical standards. It is by talking to people in that lab or those who have previously trained there, and by consulting other scientists in the same field, that one can gain this important insight.

It is also important to find an adviser who will pay close attention to your development as a scientist. Brilliant scientists sometimes make poor mentors. Often, an established leader who has no more than about a dozen people to manage can best nurture a creative, exciting, and supportive place to work. But carrying out research with an outstanding new professor with a very small group can frequently provide even better training.

Students enter graduate school both to learn how to do science well and to discover where their talents and interests lie. Success at either task requires that they be empowered to create new approaches and to generate new ideas. In my experience, beginning scientists will only gain the confidence needed to confront the unknown successfully by making discoveries through experiments of their own design. The best research advisers will therefore provide their graduate students with enough guidance to prevent them from wasting time on nonproductive pursuits, while giving them the freedom to innovate and to learn from their own mistakes.

In my field of biology, tow apprenticeships are standard for beginning scientists: first while earning a PhD degree and then in a second laboratory in a postdoctoral position. The choice of a postdoctoral laboratory is best made with a long-term career plan in mind. Scientists at this stage should intentionally try to choose a laboratory where they can acquire skills that complement those they already have. For example, a student whose PhD thesis gave her strong skills as a yeast geneticist might choose to do postdoctoral research with an expert protein biochemist, planning to later use a combination of powerful genetic and biochemical tools to attack a biological problem in an area where very few scientists have the same abilities.

But success as an independent scientist will require much more than technical skills. It is critical to be able to design research strategies that are ambitious enough to be important and exciting, innovative enough to make unique contributions likely, and nevertheless have a good chance of producing valuable results. An enormous number of different experiments are possible, but only a tiny proportion will be really worthwhile. Choosing well requires great thought and creativity, and it involves taking risks.

Senior scientists have the responsibility of maintaining a system that provides talented young scientists with the opportunity to succeed in whatever career they choose. My next editorial addresses the importance of ensuring that innovation and risk-taking are rewarded for those pursuing a life of independent research. Also, a new series in science careers highlights conversations with audacious scientists who five their own advice about selecting institutions, mentors, and projects.

There was a time not long ago when new science PhDs were expected to pursue a career path is academia. But today, most graduates end up working outside academia, not only in industry but also in careers such as science policy, communications, knowledge brokering, and patent law. Partly this is a result of how bleak the academic job market is, but there is also a rising awareness of career options that PhD scientists haven’t trained for directly — but for which they have useful knowledge, skills, and experience. Still, “there is a huge disconnect between how we currently train scientists and the actual employment opportunities available for them”, and an urgent need for dramatic improvements in training programs to help close the gap. One critical step that could help to drive change would be to require PhD students and postdoctoral scientists to follow an individual development plan (IDP).

In 2002, the US Federation of American Societies for Experimental Biology (FASEB) recommended that every postdoctoral researcher put together an IDP in consultation with an adviser. Since then, several academic institutions have begun to require IDPs for post-docs. And in June, the US National Institutes of Health (NIH) Biomedical Research Workforce Working Group recommended that the NIH require IDPs for the approximately 32,000 postdoctoral researchers they support. Other funding agencies, public and private, are moving in a similar direction.

IDPs have long been used by government agencies and the private sector to achieve specific goals for the employee and the organization. The aim is to ensure that employees have an explicit tool to help them understand their own abilities and aspirations, determine career possibilities, and set (usually short-term) goals. In science, graduate students and new PhD scientists can use an IDP to identify and navigate an effective career path.

A free Web application for this purpose, called myIDP, has become available this week. It is designed to guide early-career scientists through a confidential, rigorous process of introspection to create a customized career plan. Guided by expert knowledge from a panel of science-focused career advisers, each trainee’s self-assessment is used to rank a set of career trajectories. After the user has identified a long-term career goal, myIDP walks her or him through the process of setting short-term goals directed toward accumulating new skills and experiences important for that career choice. After each step, the user updates the plan, documenting efforts and progress. The user can opt to receive monthly email reminders from myIDP to stay focused on goals and update progress and plans. Very importantly, the plan can be altered as skills develop, interests change, and career objectives are reconsidered.

Although surveys reveal the IDP process to be useful, trainees report a need for additional resources to help them identify a long-term career path and complete an IDP. Thus, myIDP will be most effective when it is embedded in larger career-development efforts. For example, universities could incorporate IDPs into their graduate curricula to help students discuss, plan, prepare for, and achieve their long-term career goals. The participation of faculty mentors is essential because trainees need a safe, supportive atmosphere in which to openly discuss their career plans and interests.

By turning introspection into a structured exercise, the use of IDPs allows trainees to translated a vague source of anxiety into a working plan, applying their well-developed analytical skills to the critical problem of building their own lives and careers.