# Unit 7 - Mentorship

> Mentoring is a complex relationship between senior and junior professionals in the academic enterprises. It requires of the mentor time and energy for the mentee. Text A traces the origin of mentoring first and discusses with examples the explicitly and implicit elements of such practice. Text B focuses on the problems arising from the relationship of mentoring and the ways to overcome them.

## Text A - On Mentoring

> By Jeremiah A. Baroness

Mentoring is a widespread but largely unexamined phenomenon in biomedicine. It is a multifaceted and complex relationship between senior and junior professionals which, when successful, serves to fortify and extend within the younger person characteristics and qualities integral to professional development. Thus, mentoring enables younger colleagues to learn about the environment they are entering, including its priorities, its customs and usages, and the identities of the leading figures, institutions and structures. Further, in the academic enterprise in medicine, mentoring is especially important in the shaping of an academic persona and in the formulation and implementation of a career trajectory.

Mentor was a wise and faithful friend of Ulysses (Odysseus), King of Ithaca. When Ulysses departed for the siege of Troy, he entrusted to Mentor his infant son Telemachus and his wife Penelope. Mentor was largely responsible for the child’s education, the shaping of his character, the instillation of values, and, later, the wisdom of his decisions. Years later, when Ulysses had not yet returned and Telemachus embarked on a search, Mentor accompanied him. Athena, the goddess of wisdom, intermittently assumed Mentor’s form; in this sense the relationship was a gift of the gods. The presence of Mentor was particularly important when practical insight was necessary or when critical choices had to be made. By the end of the journey, Telemachus had matured both in spirit and in outlook, and could function and make decisions independently. On this basis, Mentor was viewed as “the transition figure in Telemachus’ life during the journey from youth to manhood. The Homeric saga elucidates traits associated with the current meaning of mentoring — a wise, experienced, and trusted counselor engaged in the active guidance and maturation of a younger individual.

Mentoring, to be effective, requires of the mentor empathy, maturity, self-confidence, resourcefulness, and willingness to commit time and energy to another. The mentor must be able to offer guidance for a new and evolving professional life, to stimulate and challenge, to encourage self-realization, to foster growth, and to help make more comprehensible the landscape in which the protege stands. Within medicine, these efforts extend also to such powerful professional elements as respect for the clinical as well as the scientific process, for the Samaritan functions of the physician, and for clinical and intellectual thoroughness all necessary in the development of individual expressions of professionalism.

Daniel Levinson, in Seasons of a Man’s Life (1978), describes the mentoring relationship as “one of the most complex and developmentally important a man can have in early adulthood”. He notes that the mentor’s responsibilities embrace teaching, sponsoring, guidance, socialization into a profession, and the provision of counsel and moral support. The mentor, he writes, is an inspirational figure in that he or she promotes the “realization of the Dream”, fostering the protege’s development, sharing and believing in the Dream, helping to define the newly emerging self, and providing a space in which the protege can create a life structure containing the Dream. Levinson also describes how the relationship changes over time, and how the separation can sometimes be difficult as the relationship reaches its conclusion, although many mentoring dyads end in deep and lasting friendships.

While there is not an abundance of empirical research on mentoring in medicine, it is a widely held view that mentoring relationships in early years  are critical for launching productive careers and for learning the informal networks that support productivity. Results of surveys among various types of professionals, including business executives, lawyers, chemists, and faculty in the social sciences and humanities, have suggested that mentoring relationships have strongly positive effects on the career of the protege. One study of research scientists in departments of medicine revealed that, among MDs, MD/PhDs, and PhDs, an outstanding professor/mentor was a primary influence on the decision to undertake research training. Additionally, in a study of mentors in graduate medical education at the Medical College of Wisconsin, all 25 faculty who reported having had a mentor felt that the relationship had advanced their careers, 88% reported that it had enhanced personal development, and 72% reported that it had helped them in dealing with stress. This study also found that, of the 90% who reported having had a mentor during their training, 81% in turn became mentors.

The protege is not alone in reaping benefits from mentoring; the process is usually beneficial to the mentor as well, making possible replication of important elements of his or her own value systems, helping in the perpetuation of certain codes or covenants, and, not infrequently, offering a presence that is otherwise absent in the mentor’s life. Further, opportunities may be found to advance the field of interest in which the mentor is working, and which the protege is entering.

Mentoring includes powerful explicit and implicit elements.. Explicit mentoring processes involve the active transmission of facts, techniques, and systems of thought, through overt and deliberate processes in which the mentor acts in teacher, advisor, and sponsor roles. Under this rubric might be included career counseling, professional socialization, and guidance in clinical or experimental techniques or systems of diagnostic or therapeutic thinking. Implicit processes, conversely, are not consciously or deliberately displayed. They involve the exemplar role of the mentor: intellectual style, professional priorities, deliberateness, truth telling, and the flavor of interpersonal relationships are transmitted through implicit mechanisms. Elements of scholar lines, thoroughness, and loyalty, as well as styles of interactions with patients, peers, and juniors, are also powerfully displayed in implicit fashion. Implicit processes include also demonstration of the important set of characteristics and functions that McDermott referred to as the Samaritan functions of the physician — those elements of support, empathy, and identification with the suffering of the patients that characterize doctoring at its best.

These implicit educational elements allow for validation of personal priorities, of self, and of the system; they instill a sense of belonging and of value within a more comprehensible professional setting. For the physician, implicitly education has the capacity to offer a vision of professionalism and a basis for ordering priorities.

Mentoring differs from role modeling; while the mentor is engaged in an evolving, ongoing process that persists and grows richer with time; exposures to role models are often brief. Mentoring is actively interpersonal, purposeful, and generally extends over considerable periods of time. Role modeling is not necessarily interactive; indeed the model may be unaware that he or she is being observed. Numbers of role models may impact on individuals, often with relation to limited numbers of characteristics in each instance. Role models may affect large numbers of individuals, whereas mentors ordinarily have relationships with only a few.

A paradigmatic mentoring relationship existed between William Osler and Harvey Cushing during the early 1900s. During Cushing’s early years as a faculty member at Johns Hopkins, Osler acted as personal and professional advisor, cautioning the younger man when his fiery temperament threatened this faculty relationships, and ushering him into the wider world of medicine through counseling, personal introductions and travel. Osler introduced Cushing to the study of the history of medicine, to historical writing, and to bibliophilia. Like many mentoring relationships, Cushing’s and Osler’s undoubtedly reflected personal resonance. A warm personal relationship gradually emerged; at one point Cushing and two colleagues lived in the house next to Osler’s and were given latchkey so they could come and go as they pleased, for use of his library and for friendship and consultation. In time, Cushing’s professional life took on several characteristics of Osler’s: both were exemplary teachers with pre-eminent clinics, both published widely, focusing on broad themes in medicine, and both assembled great libraries. Culmination of the mentoring relationship came when Cushing, at Lady Osler’s request, wrote his great Osler’s biography, offering some sense of his mentor for generations of students to come.
