# Unit 1 - Erring and Apologizing

> The meaning of apology has changed greatly over times. In Ancient Greek, it was jurisprudential: signifying a defense, or a defense speech in which the prosecution’s case was answered point by point. Only gradually did the word acquire the connotation of excuse, admission of fault and plea for forbearance. Text A is concerned with the aesthetics of mathematics with some personal content, and gives the layman an insight into the mind of a working mathematician. Text B argues for a ready apology in life and concludes that a person who apologizes has the moral ball in his court.

## Text A - A Mathematician’s Apology

> By G. H. Hardy

It is a melancholy experience for a professional mathematician to find himself writing about mathematics. The function of a mathematician is to do something, to prove new theorems, to add to mathematics, and not to talk about what he or other mathematicians have done. Statesmen despise publicists, painters despise art critics, and physiologists, physicists, or mathematicians have usually similar feelings: there is no scorn more profound, or on the whole more justifiable, than that of the men who make for the men who explain. Exposition, criticism, appreciation, is work for second-rate minds.

If then I find myself writing, not mathematics, but “about” mathematics, it is a confession of weakness, for which I may rightly be scorned or pitied by younger and more vigorous mathematicians. I write about mathematics because, like any other mathematician who has passed 60, I have no longer the freshness of mind, the energy, or the patience to carry on effectively with my proper job.

I propose to put forward an apology for mathematics; and I may be told that it needs none, since there are now few studies more generally recognized, for good reasons or bad, as profitable and praiseworthy. This may be true: indeed it is probable, since the sensational triumphs of Einstein, that stellar astronomy and atomic physics are the only sciences which stand higher in popular estimation. A mathematician need not now consider himself on the defensive. He dose not have to meet the sort of opposition described by Bradley in the admirable defense of metaphysics which forms the introduction to Appearance and Reality.

A metaphysician, says Bradley, will be told that “metaphysical knowledge is wholly impossible”, or that “even if possible to a certain degree, it is practically no knowledge worth the name”. “The same problems,” he will hear, “the same disputes, the same sheer failure. Why not abandon it and come out? Is there nothing else worth your labor?” There is no one so stupid as to use this sort of language about mathematics. The mass of mathematical truth is obvious and imposing; its practical applications, the bridges and steam engines and dynamos, obtrude themselves on the dullest imagination. The public does not need to be convinced that there is something in mathematics.

All this is in its way very comforting to mathematicians, but it is hardly possible for a genuine mathematician to be content with it. Any genuine mathematician must feel that it is not on these crude achievements that the real case for mathematics rests, that the popular reputation of mathematics is based largely on ignorance and confusion, and there is room for a more rational defense. At any rate, I am disposed to try to make one. It should be a simpler task than Bradley’s difficult apology.

I shall ask, then, why is it really worthwhile to make a serious study of mathematics? What is the proper justification of a mathematician’s life? And my answers will be, for the most part, such as are expected from a mathematician: I think that it is worthwhile, that there is ample justification. But I should say at once that my defense of mathematics will be a defense of myself, and that my apology is bound to be to some extent egotistical. I should not think it worthwhile to apologize for my subject if I regarded myself as one of its failures.

Some egotism of this sort is inevitable, and I do not feel that it really needs justification. Good work is not done by “humble” men. It is one of the first duties of a professor, for example, in any subject, to exaggerate a little both the importance of his subject and his own importance in it. A man who is always asking “Is what I do worthwhile?” and “Am I the right person to do it?” Will always be ineffective himself and a discouragement to others. He must shut his eyes a little and think a little more of his subject and himself than they deserve. This is not too difficult: it is harder not to make his subject and himself ridiculous by shutting his eyes too tightly.

No mathematician should ever allow himself to forget that mathematics, more than any other art or science, is a young man’s game. To take a simple illustration at a comparatively humble level, the average age of election to the Royal Society is lowest in mathematics. We can naturally find much more striking illustrations. We may consider, for example, the career of man who was certainly one of the world’s three greatest mathematicians. Newton gave up mathematics at 50, and had lost his enthusiasm long before; he had recognized no doubt by the time he was 40 that his greatest creative days were over. His greatest idea of all, fluxions and the law of gravitation, came to him about 1666, when he was 24. He made big discoveries until he was nearly 40, but after that he died little but polish and perfect.

Is mathematics, what I and other mathematicians mean by mathematics, worth doing; and if so, why? I began by laying stress on the harmlessness of mathematics — “the study of mathematics is, if an unprofitable, a perfectly harmless and innocent occupation”. I shall stick to that, but obviously it will need a good deal of expansion and explanation.

Is mathematics “unprofitable”? In some ways, plainly, it is not; for example, it gives great pleasure to quite a large number of people. I was thinking of “profit”, however, in a narrower sense. Is mathematics “useful”, directly useful, as other sciences such as chemistry and physiology are? This is not an altogether easy or uncontroversial question, and I shall ultimately say “No”, though some mathematicians, and some outsiders, would no doubt say “Yes”. And is mathematics “harmless”? Again the answer is not obvious, and the question is one which I should have in some ways preferred to avoid, since it raises the whole problem of the effect of science on war.

I went on to say that “the scale of the universe is large and, if we are wasting our time, the waste of the lives of a few university dons is no such overwhelming catastrophe”; and here I may seem to be adopting, or affecting, the pose of exaggerated humility which I repudiated a moment ago. I am sure that that was not what was really in my mind: I was trying to say in a sentence that which I have said at much greater length. I was assuming that we really had our little talents and that we could hardly be wrong if we did our best to cultivate them further.

Finally I emphasized the permanence of mathematical achievement. What we do may be small, but it has a certain character of permanence; and to have produced anything of the slightest permanent interest, whether it is a copy of verses or a geometrical theorem, is to have done something utterly beyond the powers of the vast majority of men. In these days of conflict between ancient and modern studies, there must surely be something to be said for a study which did not define with Pythagoras, and will not end with Einstein, but is the oldest and the youngest of all.

If intellectual curiosity, professional pride, and ambition are the dominant incentives to research, then assuredly no one has a fairer chance of satisfying them than a mathematician. His subject is the most curious of all — there is none in which truth plays such odd pranks. It has the most elaborate and the most fascinating technique, and gives unrivaled openings for the display of sheer professional skill. Finally, as history proves abundantly, mathematical achievement, whatever its intrinsic worth, is the most enduring of all.
